# Contemporary Issues In Data

In this assignment, I discuss two articles on data accessibility. One article speaks about a documentary called "The Social Dilemma" which exposes how social media companies use user data to influence our behavior. The other article is about how user health data can be beneficial in closing the trust gaps revealed by COVID-19. These articles hold contrasting views on whether or not companies should have access to user data.

## Article 1
In the Vineyard Gazette's [Film Highights Hidden Dangers in The Social Dilemma](https://vineyardgazette.com/news/2021/02/01/film-highlights-hidden-dangers-social-dilemma-0), a few points about data privacy are highlighted in the documentary, The Social Dilema. Throughout the documentary, many critics of social media applications are past executives and creators of Google, Instagram, Youtube, Twitter, and more. Sean Parker, the early Facebook president, described the exchange between the user and Facebook as that of a hacker invading a network, and continues to claim how Facebook is "exploiting a vulnerability in human psychology." At one point in the film, virtual reality pioneer Jaron Lanier introduces the idea that if you're not paying for the product, you are the product, essentially these companies are selling their users. In addition to this aspect of selling, Lanier explains how these companies are influencing users through gradual, slight changes in behavior and perception, "changing what you do, how you think, and who you are." 

Companies like Facebook and Google are essentially extracting information about the users and manipulating our behavior for profit, former Google design ethicist Tristan Harris states that we are all being programmed at a deeper level and are unaware of it. Regulation through legislation is necessary as well as spreading awareness on how much these companies have an effect in your behavior and thoughts. Reading privacy policies and limiting social media are some steps towards understanding the issue around data privacy and gaining some control back in our lives.

## Article 2
On the other hand, Medcity New's [Health data can help us close the cultural awareness and trust gaps exposed by Covid-19](https://medcitynews.com/2021/02/health-data-can-help-us-close-the-cultural-awareness-and-trust-gaps-exposed-by-covid-19/?rf=1) speaks on how data can be beneficical for the public's health. The Covid-19 pandemic has made clear how a lack of trust in the healthcare system can be so devastating. Covid-19 has disportionately impacted communities of color, and low-income and working people. Wehn asked if they would take a COVID vaccine this fall, half of African Americans said no, and many expressed concerns that the development of a coronavirus vaccine is not taking the needs of Black people into account. Additionally, it is stated that more than a third of Latinos said no and these two group of people both hold distrust in the health system for valid reasons. Medcity explains how this is a time where we need to do a better job of understanding who our patients are, which we can now do through the use of accurate health data shared by all providers. It is further claimed that there is no one size fits all approach. In California, there are an "estimated 220 languages spoken" and with a bit of data, health leaders are able to take the first step of speaking the right language in order to communicate effectively with patients. 

Language is the starting point of how data can benefit the health of the public, but we must explore how poeple make decisions, where they come from, and understand their experience with healthcare. Medcity explains how people want help getting to their doctor's appointment and they want to have a contact tracer to have their medical records on file just to make healthcare easier. Overall, sharing data is the first step, and when healthcare professionals trust each other enough to share information on patients, there can be progress on building patient trust in the healthcare system.